hey guys it's been a long long time to
put in this caveat if one of my videos I
used to say all the time start my videos
if I look exhausted it's because I am
exhausted that was back when I was
recording a lot of videos in between my
my Chinese classes or my Japanese
classes University of Victoria though I
often do make more videos when I'm sick
or tired I can't use my mind for other
things that might be a bit more
strenuous for me and right now is no
exception I look great and I feel great
but it's an illusion
I've actually been homesick I'm on
antibiotics right now and because I was
on his buttocks I actually lifted
weights for several hours today lifting
weights not to mentally strenuous and
activity I'm back to bench pressing
about 200 pounds at the moment it's in
kilograms so 90 kilograms is almost 200
pounds 198 pounds out of that but can't
see it in this shirt but hey we listed a
lot of weight went to the office put in
a few hours at work had a good day on
the whole but actually actually I am
sick and exhausted so that's when my
mind turned making this video so it's
been a long time since I'd that but it's
true in most of my videos I look a lot
more tired and rundown than I am if you
catch me at my best not a good day
alright uh it's not cross my mind to
make a short video reflecting on how I
first got interested in Cambodia what
was the first time ever even really
heard the word Cambodia and for me it is
a very distinctive memory that is linked
to my father who is recently deceased so
for some of you this might be an
interesting story to hear and for me and
might be an interesting story to tell I
read a comic book a mainstream DC Comics
comic book you know a superhero comic
book and I didn't get the whole plot I
only read one issue of this particular
comic so I didn't see what happened next
in the storyline but in this comic one
of the characters apparently a villain
but I don't know what unfold a shadowy
figure who could have been a villain
later or maybe he was a hero in disguise
we don't know but a shadowy figure said
something along the lines of this has
nothing to do with justice this is about
Cambodia and it's about revenge
and from the context of that moment in
the dramatic storyline of this
mainstream comic book I could simply see
that the word Cambodia was synonymous
with some kind of disaster and it was a
disaster that somehow the United States
military was responsible for so I was a
child I do not know if I had to guess
maybe I was eight years old or nine
years old I could be a little bit off
I actually I do have very very
distinctive memories of my childhood but
normally I remember how tall I was and
now I look back in the memory and I
guess I guess from the angle I was
seeing the world at how old that was I
don't tend to remember things in terms
of numbers but I do I do have very very
share of members my childhood which is
in some ways a blessing and in some ways
a curse because some of the terrible
memories are my childhood really haunted
me for years
but I went to my father and I asked him
I didn't ask him what is Cambodia you
know Chuck Bass
I went to my father and I asked him what
was it that the American army did in
Cambodia was it something similar to
Vietnam or Nicaragua so I was growing up
in a left-wing household in Toronto
Canada but you have AI parents very much
inculcated left-wing attitudes into me
as the kid and had to unravel them
figure out what was true than what was
fiction and all the things that parents
taught me but coming up as I did in that
in that social context you know I
completely expected that my father was
going to tell me that Cambodia was
another example in the history of the
world on that same pattern where my
parents would blame all the evils on the
American side and give me a very
one-sided version of the history you
know I didn't grow up with a rounded
well-balanced memory of the Vietnam War
I was taught to these things were great
evils and I was taught that the Soviet
Union was entirely on the side of good
and human progress of these complex
I grew out of it that kind of argument
is a lot more convincing when you're
maybe six years old at six years old
it's hard to unravel cold war propaganda
but let me tell you even by like age 11
I was harder Darda to convince
but um I was really surprised and I
couldn't show my surprise openly I just
looked at my father with disbelief and
scrutiny and skepticism as my father
told me with complete conviction that no
Cambodia was an example of the exact
opposite my father taught me that in
Vietnam the Americans had been great
villains but in Cambodia they had been
great heroes the words he used at the
time my father taught me that in
Cambodia the Americans were defending
the legitimate government of Cambodia
against the imperialist aggression of
the Vietnamese and that therefore in
Vietnam the Americans were the villains
because the Americans were imperialists
try to control Vietnam but in Cambodia
the Americans were defending the
Cambodians against someone else's
imperialism and therefore they were they
were great heroes and I said they're
looking at him and at that moment the
only thing I knew about Cambodia the
first thing I ever heard in my life
go Cambodia was this moment in the
storyline of a comic book which was
itself mysterious and unresolved I never
read the next issue in that comic book I
never fight out with a story wet or who
the shadowy figure was or what was this
traumatic memory of Cambodia that was
intersecting with the superheroes
plotline
I knew that my father wasn't just lying
to me I knew that my father was
repeating a lie that he wanted to
believe but couldn't quite believe
himself even though he did so from his
perspective with complete conviction in
many ways the family religion was built
on lies of exactly this kind many many
many years
later as an adult when I was researching
the political history of Cambodia what I
would learn was that what my father had
just taught me was believed by
absolutely nobody except for the
official party line of the government of
China and those who had to repeat it
well my father was teaching me was not
the official propaganda coming to the
United States was not the official
propaganda coming from the Soviet Union
that was specifically the Maoist line
and the line continued for many years
after the death of Mao Zedong in China
in justifying both the United States
intervention in Cambodia and Chinese
intervention Cambodia as a result of
what's called the strategic triangle in
geopolitics one of the strangest
Arrangements in the history of
international diplomacy emerged where
the United States and all of the US
allies simultaneously and jointly in
cooperation with China and all of
China's allies were supporting the Khmer
Rouge Pol Pot the most notorious most
violent communists in history communism
to simplify perhaps the most violent one
of the most violent and certainly the
most notorious and both sides struggled
to come up with propaganda that could
make sense of this to an incredulous
public a public who up to the early
1970s had assumed that the United States
and China were enemies as once I was
communist in as I was Eddy communist but
to make a long story short in
geopolitics the enemy of my enemy is my
friend
not all the time but often enough and a
man named Richard Nixon sat down with a
man named Mao Zedong and they fashioned
of an agreement because at that time
China and the Soviet Union were on the
verge of war and the United States
basically had their pick they could have
backed the Soviet side against China or
they could have backed the Chinese side
against Russia and there were several
genuine hotspots it was not a cold war
that really was a hot war including the
fact that for example both the Soviet
Union and China want to
to control Mongolia it's not the only
example another example keep it short
of course both the Soviet Union and
China wanted to control Cambodia or from
China's perspective they wanted to
preserve the independence of Cambodia
they wanted to prevent Cambodia from
becoming a Vietnamese colony or becoming
a Soviet pawn so that was the first ayah
for heard of Cambodia and to be honest
to you it's not something that
fascinated me it's not something that
then took over my imagination as a boy
or as a young man many years later I had
the really bizarre experience of
remembering something from my own future
that's some that's only have to be twice
in my life and I do not believe in the
supernatural in any way I don't even
believe in the natural I'm a nihilist I
neither believe in the supernatural no
the natural but twice in my life I've
had the very strange experience of
seeming to remember something that
happened in the future as if I had a
memory out of place not a
prognostication not a prediction not a
daydream I remember while I was in
university I had a memory of myself in
the future
living in Laos and at Laos was going to
be a really important part of my life
and at that time I had no interest in
Laos I thought that was ridiculous and
they know come on you know there were
other places in Asia I could imagine
living but why Laos of anywhere to live
why laughs yeah well out of them was of
no interest to me in that time I've
never taken books in the Lao language
history of politics of the library why
would I possibly end up living and
working in Laos and again that didn't
fascinate me but many years later after
that memory of course there's many many
years after I was a child in my bed
comic book I was living in Bangkok
Thailand with my Canadian girlfriend my
blond Canadian girlfriend who was not
well-suited to the hardships of life in
Southeast Asia and at that time what I
said to her was well look I'm looking at
either getting involved in humanitarian
work and research in Myanmar and the
border of Myanmar were then they were
refugee camps and civil war or Cambodia
where the Civil War had already wrapped
up at that time but still very much
country and transition
and my girlfriend said to me basically
she didn't think she could hack it she
didn't think she could survive in
Myanmar or in refugee camps for cooking
fire and she the fish could survive in
in Cambodia so her and I said
Laos
if there's one third world war torn
country devastated by bombing or maybe
you can hack it and I started making the
first of several trips from Bangkok to
Laos and back again and I always
remember how thrilled that was one of
the banks in Mekong River I did where
were the time honestly I had not thought
about it again
until that moment with that conversation
with my girlfriend I really I never
followed up on it years in between there
was just no reason for me to take an
interest in Laos but at that time I
thought oh yeah right Laos and you know
Lao said a few more decades of peace of
post-war recovery still very much a
war-torn country I mean I always
remember a really really short anecdote
once I was up in a small village in the
Northeast and I stepped off a dirt path
to pick a flower from an incredibly
beautiful tree in the tropics you know
flowering if you haven't grown up in the
tropics once in only see a tree like
that just covered in brightly colored
blossoms and it's it's awesome of course
local people they've grown up seeing it
they're used to it but I walked off the
path and the young woman standing next
to me looked at me with shock and horror
it was didn't say anything which is the
expression in her face I could really
see she was horrified and I apologize I
was reaching up to pick a flower from
the tree and turn to enhance I'm sorry
is this tree of some special religious
significance you know I'm sorry like in
Buddhism this is this particular tree
off-limits to take a flower as I am yeah
I just had no idea why she's our and she
said to me no you could have been killed
in that area of Laos where I'd stepped
off the path there were so many bombs so
much unexploded ordnance just in the
earth that from her perspective stepping
off that path in that area just walking
a few steps off the well-trodden path
you could be you could be blown up on
the spot
so was a war-torn country and uh there
were some risks beautiful area
what's the while you got that kind of
chilling reminder of the long shot of
the war but they did already have
decades of stability and recovery and at
that time I only chose to go to Laos
because the girlfriend I had couldn't
hack it couldn't hack it in Cambodia
Connect and Myanmar under under more
rugged frontiers and the whole first
year I was in Laos I was still really
doubting it and I broke up with that
girlfriend eventually but I'd say to the
other people in my life including the
girlfriend at first then she went back
to Canada but I said if you like you
know I just don't know if I should
really be here or if I should be in
Cambodia or Myanmar
you know this gotta be another way ahead
Laos seems sort of like a small
backwater where as Cambodia seems huge
in my imagination just a bigger war
bigger war crimes bigger genocide you
know a more ancient continuous written
tradition to language even the modern
literature in Cambodia there was more
poetry and more political publications
in terms of the Free Press you know what
you find in a bookstore so a lot more
going on and a Cambodia course both
countries were struggling to have some
semblance of democracy but the reality
for free speech very very different in
Laos as opposed to Cambodia it seemed
like Cambodia was always the bigger
deeper more challenging frontier and
that Laos was something I was just
settling for you know for the sake of
that girl friends creature conference
for the whole first year I thought that
but I stayed in Laos for two and a half
years and had a breaking point with that
to where one day I was taken in and
interrogated by the police corrupt
police who were just trying to extort
money out of me and you know speaking
English and speaking a little bit of Lao
of lotion the Lao language I had to
negotiate my way out of this difficult
situation and I did I completely see in
the police themselves were delighted
they remember they were smiling laughs
they couldn't believe I did it
but I sort of legally negotiated the
situation said okay so if I can provide
this document this document then you
have to let me go without my paying a
fine right and I managed to get those
documents oh you know it was a
really really kind of funny process but
of course I was speaking little isolated
words of Lao and very difficult and when
I came back from that we have exploit
police were nice guys but I said I said
to my roommate I guess at the time this
guy I knew there he lived upstairs in
the same building not really my roommate
but this guy who lived upstairs I said
to a while you know those cops there are
the nicest guys who ever tried to extort
me
yep retract to uh ever tried to threaten
me and steal my money what are the
bloody Facebook's could be weird eights
about it and I did win in the end I
didn't pay a dime but remember when that
happened I said to myself ok it was
about a year into it I thought to stop
dreaming about Cambodia either I'm going
to commit a hundred percent to learning
Lao I was still learning Pali so it's
learning two languages simultaneously or
I pack up and leave today and then go to
Cambodia and I work on that language I
deal with the corrupt cops there so that
was when I made the change and I really
poured on learning modern law because I
said look that's that that's the
standard after me I have to speak Lao
well enough that I can talk my way out
of being held at gunpoint being held at
knife point being the situation with
soldiers or cops I've got to be able to
go to the frontier and do this and I
decided to do it they're not me and
Martin on Cambodia etc and then for
about a year and a half I was in that
mode still studying poly still studying
Buddhism still studying ancient history
and modern etc etc and so ironically I
only ended up going back to Cambodia and
fulfilling that side of my mandate or
dream or whatever II want to say after
the authorities and Laos threatened to
kill me threatened sent me to a gulag
tortured me kicked me out of the country
you know that was story so Cambodia
ended up being like my second choice but
it's true it all started with that comic
book and that frankly surreal reminder
of the long shadow of the Cold War of
communist misinformation shall we say
the personal emotional reality of
international geopolitics even within my
own family even within my father's own
life and
in unraveling the political history of
the United States the war in Vietnam the
war in Laos the war in Cambodia it's
true I always was also unraveling in
some ways the mythology that I was
raised with the ideology my father
believed in and finding my way from
belief to disbelief from ideology to
nihilism